Okay. 34th verse it says harsh words
disturb the minds of others cause
deterioration
in a bodhic surface conduct. Thus giving
of harsh words which are unpleasant to
others is the practice of bodhic sattas.
This verse is very important to
practice, right? It deals with the
importance of skillful
speech and the practice of bodhic
sattvas.
It says harsh words
disturb the minds of others.
this
there are several different ways we can
speak harshly.
We can directly say something harmful,
hurtful to someone
or another way is to say something
behind someone's back, right? That will
get back to them
um and make them very very unhappy.
So harsh words
whether speaking out of anger,
frustration
or
carelessness
can deeply disturb others mind
and harm relationships.
Um they are unpleasant to everyone
and this problem is very common.
So how do we avoid harsh words?
Avoiding harsh words requires
mindfulness
uh in Mahayana Buddhism
and
also a deep understanding of the impact
your speech has on others. Observe
your words and the intention behind
them.
[Music]
Sometimes, as I said, right, sometimes
we say something,
there's not necessarily
bad intention, motivation behind, but
just we're not mindful. then we say
something
that's also hurts others.
So mindfulness observe
um my teacher say you know pause before
speaking
and ask yourself
will these words bring benefit or not
bring benefit or harm.
Consider how the other person will feel
upon hearing your words.
Imagine yourself in their place.
How would you like to be spoken to?
This kind of like
exchanging, right?
Try to speak with the intention of
helping rather than hurting.
Harsh words arise from
anger, irritation.
So
learn to recognize
and manage these emotions before they
manifest
uh in speech.
practice. Remember as I said practice
um silence reflection
or
step away from situation if needed.
Um
avoid divisive speech. Don't create
conflict or
encourage misunderstanding.
These all are my teachers say all the
time.
Remember that
words cannot be taken back once spoken.
So
when feeling angry or frustrated,
my teacher always say remain try to
remain silent
for a moment at least if you can.
By integrating this practice into daily
life, we can transform our speech into
love and kindness. and bodhicitta
and to make uh good connections rather
than harm.
We can think I am a Mahayana Buddhist
practitioner.
So I must at all times
conduct myself
um
uh
kindness,
compassionate
and subdue my mind and always act in a
manner that is uh beneficial and not
harmful towards others.
If we go against this commitment of not
doing or saying things um
deliberately to hood others then our
practice will diminish.
That's why it says cause deterioration
in a bodhic sattva's conduct.
this verse say right. So for this reason
we should give up harsh words that are
not pleasing to others
especially when someone is in a in a in
a
um leadership position
uh it is very easy to become
arrogant.
um
you know they think you know I can say
whatever I want because I'm the person
in in power
um they believe in me and will follow me
no matter what
that is irrogant rightly
thinking and acting like this uh
diminish
um our love compassion
um
and leads to harming others through
harsh words,
harsh words.
So then does that mean that when you are
in a
leadership position for example
you never say things that are unpleasant
to other people? No at all. Not at all.
Um avoiding harsh words does not mean
avoiding difficult conversations.
A bodhic sattva
or any
good leader
may sometimes need to say things that
are unpleasant for others to hear.
But the key is um to do so skillfully
um with the right motivation.
Um
so from your own side you don't have the
motivation to hurt others when you speak
with a good motivation.
Does it mean that you will always be
successful in not saying things are
unpleasant to others? No. Sometimes
people tell us you know things out of
kindness but um our ego uh doesn't like
to hear those things so we get upset and
angry.
You may not have any intention to harm
when speaking with others. But if you
are not mindful,
your words may be unpleasant and cause
you know
cause unintentional harm.
So some people are unaware of their
um their um habitual arrogance. So their
way of speaking
comes
across
as arrogant
uh even though they don't recognize it
and this can harm others. This is why
Buddha always say right mindfulness so
important in speech.
If you are practicing as a bodhic sattva
it doesn't necessarily mean that all you
say is pleasant words but all you say
should be
guided by wisdom and compassion.
even if it is difficult for others to
hear.
So for example, if you are um leader of
your
there there are many different ways to
speak, right? If you are leader of your
workers, for example, you need to tell
them that um their work is not enough.
You don't have to say your work is
terrible,
right?
Instead you can say like oh I noticed
some areas where improvement is needed.
So let's go over them together.
That is good way to tell them, right?
You don't have to say, "Oh, you're
terrible. You're your work is not
enough."
That's what we call skillfully speak.
If you are a teacher, you need to
correct a student mistakes.
It's the same thing. You don't have to
say, "Oh, you are a bad student."
You know,
so being a bodhic satta or good leader
does not mean avoiding difficult
situations, but it means, you know,
express them, you know, in a way that
helps uh rather than harm.
[Music]
In our normal life, sometimes harsh
words come from
reacting too quickly.
If we feel upset
as I said my teacher say you know if you
feel upset
step back from the conversation before
responding.
So I think this verse is important to
practice and remember all the time.
Now here we have completed the
explanation of the different practice of
bodhic sattvas
uh which consisted of the six paramatas.
All right.
Now we have here 35th verse which uh
discusses how to abandon disturbing
emotions.
It says
when it says one when emotions become
habitual they are difficult to get rid
of with antidotes. Thus with mindfulness
and awareness
eliminating them the moment they arise
is the practice of bodhic sattas.
Here we begin the bodhic satta practice
of um eliminating
uh disturbing emotions by explaining why
they are so difficult to work with.
If we let disturbing emotions
um cla
in Sanskrit right emotion
um disturbing emotions become
habituated. Then of course they um
become stronger and stronger and
stronger and stronger
and at a certain points disturbing
emotions become so strong
then even if you apply their um antidote
solution it's very very hard to
overcome.
Therefore, the key to overcome negative
emotions is uh
uh is uh catching them early. So we
should not allow
ourselves to get
too used to them. A bodhic sattva does
not wait for disturbing emotions to grow
stronger.
Instead they recognize them and let them
dissolve at the very moment they arise.
Then it easy to abandon them.
That is the practice of bodhic satta. It
says
if you hold a fire
in your hand
will burn your hand. But if you
throw away right away, you can save you
can protect your head.
Sha Deawa has said that um
mental afflictions are like enemies
except they are much worse.
That means emotions destroy ourselves
and destroy also others.
When Yeshin soldier, you know who she
is? Ring knows. She knows who is who is.
>> Oh, there you go.
Isaia
asked Samboa,
"Who is the worst enemy?"
Sambawa said, "Negative emotions.
So always
alert and watch what your mind is doing
and think about it.
Uh negative emotions will never become
our friend
under any circumstances, right?
they always harm us in this lifetime and
also future lives if you believe it.
So whatever practice you are doing it
has to work as an effective
antidote to your negative emotions.
So on the positive side,
if you can manage to emotion,
eliminate them,
they cannot come back. As long as you
maintain your uh mindfulness and inner
awareness. So it says eliminating them
the moment they arise.
This verse is about the
necessity of abandoning the negative
emotions as soon as they arise.
So it's like if you have a have a a a
beautiful beautiful garden that is full
of beautiful flowers
but if you let in animal come into it
what will happen? then it will destroy
your beautiful garden. So you have to be
mindful
and as soon as you see the animal you
have to get rid of it right away.
So similarly disturbing emotions will
get into your mind and will destroy your
peaceful mind and uh and your freedom.
The longer we allow this this this um
clas delusions to take root uh the
deeper and longer is get stays there. So
for this reason we have uh uh no choice.
We have to apply the appropriate
antidote
uh at the very moment they arise
and we have to guard our mind in order
to be free from them.
And the best time to train and antidotes
is when your mind is not uh disturbed
and not overwhelmed by delusions.
This way when um negative emotions
arise, you have had some practice and
experience in um utilizing the antidotes
to um subdue
this negative emotions. Otherwise, it
would be difficult to uh start
practicing when your mind is in a very
um um agitated state.
Um but is
>> you know um once for example when you
get angry
at that moment it's so hard difficult to
um practice and apply antidotes.
Um
that time the bast was my teacher said
just be silent
don't say anything
then maybe you can recognize nature mind
right there
and then you have a room
but um yeah that's difficult right when
you get angry then Hey, you are May and
a practitioners
and practice patience. It's so
difficult. So that point is just
difficult. But before that, you know,
just be mindful
and think about bodhicitta
that will help.
Okay. Now the next 36 verse
It says in brief wherever you are and
whatever you do always examine state of
your mind with constant mindfulness
awareness benefits. Did Did we say this
already? No. Okay. Benefiting others is
the practice of bodhic sattas.
Okay.
30 36.
Huh?
>> Similar to 31. I think that's a
>> You're right. I'm confused.
Yeah. So, yeah, you're right. This verse
is a summary of u actually you know this
whole whole teaching
the whole teaching 37ism practice bodhic
sattas.
So there are two lessons we have to
focus on inward
awareness
and outward benefit to others
uh which are the main practice on the
body suffer path.
So this verse
emphasizes the importance of continued
self awareness
and the practice of bodhic self path
right it says in brief wherever you are
what whatever you do examine the mind.
So this means
um knowing your real intention at all
times. There is no special place,
special time, special situation
required.
Whether you are working,
um you're resting or talking with many
people or alone, always be aware and
check and with yourself.
This is exactly what the Buddha
wanted his followers to do.
And then it says here always examine the
state of your mind with constant
mindfulness and awareness.
This is about developing the habit of
being present and aware not just on the
meditation cushion
but all the time. So mindfulness and
awareness are essential
not only for reducing negative emotions
uh anything else but um also for
limiting their influence. Right? The
main focus of both mindfulness and and
awareness is uh the examination of the
mind.
Um
is your mind in a
positive state or is your mind in a
negative state?
The mindfulness is keeping the mind in a
place. Awareness is watching what is
happening.
If everything is done with this two
then you will be ready to
serve and help others because both your
capacity and the path will be there.
But action without mindfulness and
awareness could be dangerous.
So no matter how long you are going to
meditate,
try to meditate with mindfulness and
awareness.
These two meditations
go with all your um
activities including you know like when
you meditate of course mindfulness
awareness is the key but also like
worldly life you know your daytoday life
mindfulness awareness
we have to think about that
and mindfulness and awareness are really
useful
because they support your actions
and they're very easy. I mean once you
remember mindfulness awareness,
you don't need any like secret
initiation empowerment in order to
practice mindfulness and awareness don't
you?
So these practice help you find the best
connection within yourself.
When you have mindfulness, you are
making a connection with everything.
Um and then there is no room for other
um distractions
because you are not separate from what
is there.
Uh mindfulness is fully being in the
present moment and awareness is seeing
um the discovery of mindfulness.
It is your recognition.
So the point in this context is to
constantly be able to recognize
uh the presence of negative thoughts as
well as uh positive qualities in the
mind.
The reason for doing this is not simply
to benefit and protect yourself but to
benefit others too. You know as a
Mahayana practitioner the ultimate goal
and motivation is not just uh
self-improvement but it's a uh acting
with uh kindness wisdom to benefit
others
as Kadumba masterba said in the Mahayana
there is nothing else to do but benefit
beings.
So constantly
checking and purifying the mind is key
in Mahayana
uh practice.
So
keep an eye on the mind at all times.
Stay present. Stay kind. Can you say the
distinction between um mindfulness and
awareness is
>> the distinction mindfulness
um is fully being in the present moment,
right?
And awareness is seeing the
the sort of discovery, the mindfulness.
Oh, you are mindful. You are present.
You are there present. But who know who
knows like you are in there? That's
awareness.
>> I think the the teachers explain
different ways but I I like explain this
way.
That's my own experience. Maybe I'm
wrong. Don't trust me. Okay.
Awareness is is your recognition. Right?
This goes when you think about nature
mind you will understand.
So
right
did I say in the Mahayana there is
nothing else to do but benefit beings.
So mindfulness, awareness,
let every moment be a chance to grow for
the sake of others.
In Mahayana Buddhism, everything happens
in the present moment
and the experience of life moment by
moment
is very precious.
Uh because it is your life.
It is our life relative
relative life
not ultimate life. Relative life is uh
is um
this is you know everything happening in
this this present moment. Then you
experience life moment by moment. But if
you're thinking about past we're
thinking about future that's not your
life.
not relative life. Ultimate life is
always there.
So that that help mindfulness awareness
bring this um uh how do you call
precious time and
um good opportunities
looking at you. This is your life,
right?
You're thinking about
children,
time,
that's not who you are.
This is our life. So just enjoy.
But unfortunately we find it difficult
to keep ourself in the present this
moment this habit. So therefore
mindfulness and awareness are important
not only for meditation not only for
meditation but for everything.
So anyway in summary this whole teaching
is
whatever actions
and dharma practice we do
we should do them with the intention of
benefiting all beings.
So
inwardly
I think you have to focus on mindfulness
and awareness.
Outwardly
whatever you do
should benefit yourself and others
positively.
That's what this whole teaching the 37
practice bodhic sattva is about.
Okay.
>> Do you like this teaching?
>> Well, good.
What?
>> 36 versus
>> 36. Did I I didn't say
36.
Absolutely. You're right. I think I said
Always
make sure you're mindful and your
awareness is there.
means in brief whatever you do
it for the benefit of others including
yourself. That's uh 36 verse. Okay. Now,
we're going to stop there and say this
long chapter.